# This Time Without Earplugs: Evaluating Parks Canada's Compliance with Legal and Policy Commitments

## Objective
As Canada continues to grapple with its colonial present, continuously asking "What do Indians want?" (The Red Nation 2021, 6) and seeking 're'conciliation with Indigenous peoples, the response from Indigenous peoples is, again and again, to be treated with respect without needing to assimilate, to have their rights and traditions honoured, and to have their knowledge and science be taken seriously on its own terms (Mitchell 2021, Hunt 2017, Simpson 2011, Kovach 2021, Wilson 2008, Shultis and Heffner 2016, Nadasdy 2003, Jos & Watson 2019). Despite ongoing criticisms, the exclusion-based conservation paradigm which emerged out of colonial nature/culture dichotomes has remained dominant, despite efforts toward 'comanagement' (Shults and Heffner, 2016). The purpose of this research is to a) evaluate Parks Canada Agency's (PCA) progress towards complying with the Truth and Reconciliation Commission's Calls to Action (including treaty obligations, UNDRIP, PCA mandate; TRC 2015, 4-5), as regards its relationships with Indigenous Peoples, b) identify potential remedies and next steps towards repairing relationships, c) create a baseline analysis of how Indigenous land use and stewardship is being affected by PCA jurisdiction across a wide range of geopolitical areas. 

## Hypothesis
Although a few studies examine individual aspects of Parks Canada's relationships with Indigenous Peoples, they are usually based on experiences at one park, and/or fail to assess the issue as a legal one, instead focusing on an *ethical* rights-based approach, rather than a *legal* rights-based approach. While the two are not mutually exclusive and examinations of the ethics is extremely important, there is a lack of data about PCA's legal compliance, which this research seeks to address. A major gap in the existing literature is a comprehensive analysis of PCA's policies and practice, with respect to its major commitments and legal obligations. By analyzing not just the ethics of PCA's behaviour, but its compliance/non-compliance with the law and commitments, a deeper understanding of operational solutions will emerge. PCA has a history of non-compliance (Gowland 2020, UNESCO 2017), and an institution-wide analysis will reveal current commitment-compliance gaps, and inform policy-makers and Indigenous communities and decision-makers about what actions have been most worthwhile.

## Methods
This research seeks to break from established protected area management traditions, which seek to 'integrate' Indigenous knowledge "into forms compatible" with Western scientific paradigms, thereby devaluating, denegrating and delgitimizing it (Nadasdy 2003; Kovach 2021, 64-5; Hunt 2017). Following a mixed methods approach that recognizes that Indigenous thought does not always fit cleanly into Western academic or scientific paradigms, such as the dichotomy between quantitative and qualitative analysis, Indigenous knowledge will be centered rather than pushed to the sidelines (Hunt 2017, Kovach 2021). Indigenous paradigms will serve as the default research context to the maximum of my ability, as a settler researcher, to do so without the embodied experience and knowledge of Indigeneity (Hunt 2017). In this way, I will proceed as a student/witness, rather than as an academic/recorder (Hunt 2017, 5). Furthermore, all details of the research will be disclosed with potential community partners, so that they are in a position to provide, or withhold, *enthusiastic* consent, keeping in mind that many communities are experiencing research fatigue and are overburdened by time requests (Kovach 2021, 125).

Using Sheryl Lightfoot's spectrum of compliance Lightfoot 2016, as well as numbers 43, 44, 45, 47, 53 and 57 of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission's calls to action (TRC 2015, 4-5), I will evaluate PCA's location on a compliance matrix. Data collection procedures will be developed using a community-driven approach which seeks to keep Indigenous knowledge within Indigenous communities, supports data governance, improves community progress toward community goals, and contributes to protecting the intellectual property of Indigenous peoples and the land.

Except at the request of individual participants, all participants will be cited using Macleod's (2021) citation templates, and authorship will be provided in consultation with partners, according to their preferences.

Research sites will be selected based on (Pearkes 2022; Johnston 2020; Finegan 2018; Youdelis 2016, Thomlinson & Crouch 2012, Hamel v. PCA 2022; UNESCO 2017; Weber 2019): a) litigation (Lake Superior National Marine Protected Area, Wood Buffalo National Park); b) past studies (Gwaii Haanas National Park Reserve and Haida Heritage Site, Jasper, Banff, Revelstoke, Kootenay, Wood Buffalo National Parks); c) Indigenous news releases, publications and testimony (Wood Buffalo, Georgian Bay Islands, Bruce Peninsula National Parks), and d) PCA datasets (Jasper, Banff, Glacier Georgian Bay Islands, Bruce Peninsula, Glacier, Wood Buffalo National Parks). Finally, Point Grondine Park, an Indigenous Protected Area established on Wiikwemkoong would provide a good opportunity for deepening understandings of some Indigenous perspectives of protected area management and priorities.

Deliverables will be determined with partner communities, but land-use map using ArcGIS Pro, interpretive programming, and a comprehensive monitoring report on PCA's progress against its goals and obligations will likely be advantageous for both participant communities and for the outcomes of this research.

## Significance
Indigenous land significance maps (also known as 'traditional land use' maps) are often an essential component of Indigenous efforts to have their human, Treaty and UNDRIP rights recognized. Maps created during this research will be essential for producing the monitoring report, but can also signficantly benefit Indigenous partners in any current or future effort to have their rights honoured. The ability of art and communication to effect conciliation has been well documented (Simpson 2010, 98; Schlink 2009). Creating interpretative programming can assist Indigenous communities with raising awareness and communicate their experiences through a means which is both culturally appropriate and seen as 'legitimate' by Parks Canada. By holding Parks Canada to the standard of its own obligations, rather than abstract ethics, this research can serve as an external audit of PCA's progress, to be used in litigation by Indigenous nations, or internally to improve outcomes and behaviour within the Agency. Future efforts by Parks Canada to engage with Indigenous stakeholders on their own terms may bring a distrustful relationship characterized by "Reconciliation is Dead" (The Red Nation, 2021) to one where progress toward mutual goals can be made in good faith.