# September 26

*Chen, Hunt and Sheppard*

    I found these three articles really interesting to put in conversation with each other. While all three articles explore the expansion of geography -- past, present and future, Chen and Sheppard approach it as a "here's what you need to know to be more expert in your field," and to provide a way for existing 'experts' to keep up with changes in the field. Chen and Sheppard advocate that to be an 'expert', scholars need to continue to expand the knowledge systems that they are willing to include as 'legitimate' types of evidence. Hunt, however, rejects the entire notion of scholastic 'expertise', in a way that rings the most true to me. How can any of us be experts when so much knowledge, and entire systems of knowledge, exist in a way that we can't comprehend, or which would take hundreds of years to accumulate? I can study Class 3 river rapids for fifty years, publishing on my deathbed, but it wouldn't be the totality of the experience and knowledge that exists about Class 3 river rapids; I would have the narrowest possible view of them (that is, the view from the information one person is able to synthesize). Chen and Sheppard also don't really explore the power relations between knowledge systems in the same way that Hunt does, instead choosing to just make their audiences aware that other sources of knowledge exist. To me, the contrast between these papers, with Chen and Sheppard on one hand and Hunt on the other, is incredibly useful for demonstrating the difference between writing -about- knowledge, and -embodying- that knowledge. It makes me curious about what would happen if scholars wrote more about their own embodied knowledge, and then came into conversation with each other, rather than sharing others' stories and knowledge, and conversing about it on the behalf of the people whose knowledge they've studied.

# October 24

*Tadaki, Brierley and Cullum*

    I'm used to reading about cultural differences in the interpretation and classification of physical landscapes, so reading about differences between epistemologies and subfields was fascinating. The fact that ecologists, geomorphologists, geologistss, planners, resource managers, etc., can work to integrate different subfields' interpretations of geographical features demonstrates that situations where they fail to do so are the result of exclusionary choices, rather than capaticative limits. Additionally, scrutinizing classiication systems as structures which are informed by, and inform, epistemologies is a way of applying critical and human geography to topics which are generally treated as mostly physical or economic in nature (like rivers), and the authors do a really good job of making these critiques accessible and succinct. One thing the authors point out, and which keeps coming up in my own research, is that geographers and environmental scientists are increasingly calling for their fields to be more inclusive of other ways of knowing, but seem to hesitate when it comes time to actually *include* that knowledge.

*Dark and Bram*

    Similar to Tadaki, Brierley and Cullum, this article deals with the implications of trying to compare phenomenon when our ways of conceptualizing them isn't able to be standardized. However, unlike Tadaki, Brierley and Cullum, Ddark and Bram do not emphasize, or even question, the ways that areal units (and solutions to MAUP, in turn) establish and reinforce value systems within physical geography. dark and Bram are concerned with solutions that lead to the most statistically accurate results, but what, for instance, is the result when planning decisions are made based on 'scientific' decisions that fail to includde cultural significance? Is a watershed able to be isolated to only what can be seen from a LIDAR or Landsat image? If we do include other ways of knowing, the MAUP becomes much more complex. How do we replicate a study when it is intrinsically tied to the place where it was conducted? If areal units are simplified and standardized to avoid the MAUP, inccreasing replicability, are the results still accurate if they fail to include non-statistical or non-quantifiable information?